[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
You know, I can't
think of a subject that
is more dear to my heart
than monsters, creatures.
Everybody wants to know
about these things.
What are they?
Where do they come from?
Our special guest
on Beyond Belief
today is an expert on monsters.
>>A series of Bigfoot sightings
in the small town of Minerva,
Ohio, captured the nation's
attention some 40 years ago.
Since then, it has been
a largely forgotten.
But Minerva's
monster has returned
to the spotlight once again,
thanks to documentary filmmaker
Seth Breedlove.
It is the first in his series,
"Small Town Monsters," which
explores lost and bizarre
history around the United
States.
Seth's second film, called
"The Beast of Whitehall,"
examines another odd case
that occurred in New York
in the late 1970s.
Seth, who also hosts a Bigfoot
podcast called "SasWhat,"
discusses the filmmaking
process and explains
why the few cases
they've highlighted
stand out from
typical sightings.
Today, on Beyond Belief.
>>NOORY: Well, Seth, what an
exciting career you've got.
At such a young age, too.
>>SETH BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
It's something else.
I was talking to
someone beforehand
about the breadth of things that
I've done in addition to this.
Just random things, like tiling
floors and repossessing homes
and all that kind of stuff.
But now I make
movies about Bigfoot.
So how to go from one to the
other is difficult to track.
But I think somewhere in there
I became a newspaper journalist,
and that helped feed into
documentary filmmaking.
I've always loved
film especially,
but that kind of fit
with my love of Bigfoot
and the things all
came together for me.
>>NOORY: So Seth,
with the varied career
that you've had, how did you
turn that journalism career
into investigating monsters?
>>BREEDLOVE: I started getting
into the Bigfoot subject
in the early 2000s.
And there was actually a
series of unusual events
that happened in the town
that I had grown up in.
There were deer being found on
the outskirts of town actually
ripped in half, hides ripped
out, that kind of thing,
stuffed up in trees at about
heights of 8 to 10 feet.
And I was just
learning about Bigfoot,
and that was the first thing
I investigated on my own.
And my version of
investigating was
to go down and talk to locals
about what they had seen
or if they had seen anything.
And that fed into
my desire to write
a book on these small
town monster cases.
Kind of cases where
a creature comes
into a community or a scene
in or around a community,
and it impacts the
culture of that community.
Not just a bunch of
people see an unusual--
>>NOORY: Economically
and otherwise, right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah, everything.
Psychologically, how it
impacts the local folklore.
How the people that are involved
in the sighting react to it
and how the town reacts to them.
All that kind of stuff.
And I actually put this
together originally as a book
proposal, because I'm more of
a writer, I've always thought.
But I love filmmaking,
and when I was a kid,
I was a giant film geek.
I mean, all I did was sit
around and watch movies,
and I weighed like 300 pounds.
That was all I did was sit and--
>>NOORY: Did you really?
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah, I did.
That was all I did
was watch movies.
But I gave up on that
dream, and then somehow it
came back around when the book
project, for the most part,
was turned down by
most of the publishers.
And I talked to a
couple friends of mine
who were-- they had the
equipment necessary to make
a movie.
And I said, do you guys want to
just do this as a film project?
Let's set out.
Let's do one movie about
the Minerva monster, which
was our local monster, and then
see where it goes from there.
And so that's the whole
impetus for everything.
But it all fed together.
The things that I had some
knowledge of helped it.
>>NOORY: What is it about
monsters that people just love?
>>BREEDLOVE: It's
the idea, for me.
And I think it is
for a lot of people.
It's the idea that there could
be these undiscovered creatures
living in your own backyard.
I grew up with a huge forest
behind my parents' house,
and we played in the woods
all the time as a kid.
And there's always
the idea that hey,
you know what, there's a
monster somewhere here.
There's always-- you were told--
>>NOORY: Lurking somewhere.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
We were always
telling each other
these stories about
the Bolivar monster,
or whatever your monster
is, your local monster.
And every town has a monster.
I always say that.
Every town has one.
So I think it's the idea of--
>>NOORY: Whether it's a
human or otherwise, right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Right, right.
And a lot of times,
it is a human being.
And we've been
discussing that too,
how wide-spanning the very
idea of small town monsters is.
It doesn't just have to
cryptids, it could be anything.
Your local monster can be a
serial killer or someone that--
>>NOORY: That's exactly right.
Who terrorizes a community.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
And every town has one.
>>NOORY: Have you found
that these small cities
like the notoriety that these
creatures bring the town?
>>BREEDLOVE: If they're smart.
That's the difficult
thing about it.
A lot of towns shy away
from it because they
find it kind of embarrassing.
They're a local monster.
They don't want to embrace
that because it will
make them a laughing stock.
That's how they think.
Or they're worried about
how people perceive it.
In the case of Minerva,
back in the '70s,
when the case originally broke,
they were concerned about that.
Today, they see that
as a great opportunity
to bring in advertising,
tourism, all that.
And the same situation has
happened with Whitehall
in New York.
They're finally embracing
their local monster,
even though back in the
'70s it was a laughingstock,
and they avoided
it at all costs.
Today they've got a
statue in the town.
And if you're--
>>NOORY: It's like Rocky.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
And if you're smart
about it, you'll
make that a centerpiece
for the town.
Especially these
small towns that
are hurting from the
economy and all that.
>>NOORY: Your very first film
was "Minerva." "The Minerva
Monster."
Let's take a look.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>It was August of 1978.
Our shift started at 10:30, and
as I left the Sheriff's office
to head out into my area, I
got a call to go to a house
on Lincoln Street East,
which is Route 30, US 30.
And when I got out of the
car and met the people
at the house, who were obviously
distressed, what they described
to me was hearing
rocks or something
hit the roof of their house.
>>When we first started seeing
it, it was, I would say,
between six and seven foot tall.
Covered in hair.
It still had facial features.
It wasn't completely
like a rag mop, you know,
over the face and everything.
But it probably weighed a good
400 to 500 pounds, I'd say.
Maybe more.
Muscular.
Because you could
see, it wasn't like--
>>NOORY: Seth, when
you were interviewing
these people for the
Minerva Monster documentary,
did you believe them?
>>BREEDLOVE: Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
With these cases,
especially Minerva,
you're dealing with people
who never really stood
to gain anything
from their encounter
and from coming forward
with their encounter.
The Cayton family,
especially, they
were ridiculed horribly by
the town and the community.
>>NOORY: They didn't want that.
>>BREEDLOVE: They
didn't want any of that.
>>NOORY: Or deserve it.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
Or deserve it.
And there's other
people in the movie.
We interviewed a lot of
people from the community
around there.
I think we have four or
five other people that
claimed to see the creature
around the same time
and up to today.
And for the most part, when
a witness comes forward
to talk about their case,
it's not a situation
where they're begging
me to come on camera.
I typically have to beg
them to talk to me about it.
And with the Minerva case,
especially with the Cayton
family, they'd
never gone on camera
to talk about their case.
They'd been offered deals
with television shows
to talk about it.
They'd had people coaxing on
them to come on television.
It took me about three months
of working with the Caytons
to get Howie to come on camera.
He never spoke of it.
>>NOORY: To build up
that confidence, right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Well, I'm sure
you've done that yourself.
You have to build that kind of
relationship with a witness.
And--
>>NOORY: It's the ones that
want to come on quickly--
>>BREEDLOVE: You worry about.
>>NOORY: You worry about.
That's right.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
And with the Caytons, I
never had that impression
that we really want to pull
something over on someone.
They have nothing
to gain from it.
And their story
is so fascinating.
And it's not overblown.
Or like, sometimes you
read these stories,
and there was a Bigfoot
ripping apart their house,
or something like that.
And there are very dramatic
elements to Cayton's story.
But the fact is that
they didn't want this.
They didn't ask for it.
And that fascinates me.
And then things like the
local law enforcement
officers, who especially
have nothing to gain from it.
Because typically, law
enforcement officers
that come forward
with their sightings
are a subject of ridicule.
>>NOORY: I bet
they're all baffled.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
And so for us, on both of
the films we've done so far,
we've had law enforcement
officials that were involved.
And especially with them, I'm
very drawn to those cases,
because they're trained
in the art of observation.
>>NOORY: What can you tell
us about the Minerva monster?
>>BREEDLOVE: It was a case
that happened in 1978.
And it was basically
interacting with this one
particular family.
The creature was said to be this
upright-walking, hair-covered
monster.
Seven feet tall, glowing
orange eyes or red eyes,
depending on who
you're talking to.
>>NOORY: Which is a great
Bigfoot description.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
The only difference is this
thing is covered in hair.
And I know that
sounds like Bigfoot,
but when I say it's
covered in hair,
I mean it's almost like a rag
mop, is how Howie described it.
To the point where
you could hardly
make out facial features.
>>NOORY: Here and everywhere.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
>>NOORY: Ape-like almost.
>>BREEDLOVE: Very
ape-like, yeah.
So they were seeing
this creature
a lot behind their house.
And at some point, it
actually-- it appears
that it attacked their dog.
Their dog one night was barking
ferociously, nonstop all night.
They came out in the
morning, and the dog
had been ripped
out of its collar
and its neck had been snapped.
>>NOORY: Oh my god.
>>BREEDLOVE: So
they also discovered
that the dog had dug a seven
foot tunnel under its house,
wide enough for two animals,
that it had obviously
been hiding in whenever
whatever was terrifying it
had been coming around.
>>NOORY: The dog did this?
>>BREEDLOVE: The dog had dug
this tunnel under its house--
>>NOORY: To get away.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
To hide under.
So something had obviously
terrified the dog.
Now, what we discovered
during the making of the film
is that this wasn't
only during 1978.
The original "Akron
Beacon Journal" story
started running in 1978.
But there had been
a history going back
decades, in the area, of
unknown creature sightings.
But with even the
Caytons, they had
had a run-in two
years prior, where
Howie Cayton and
three other boys
actually claimed to have
jumped on the creature.
They were walking
around a pond--
>>NOORY: That wasn't smart.
>>BREEDLOVE: No. [LAUGHS] They
were walking around a pond.
They claimed to see
it down in this gully,
and they jumped on it.
And it threw one of them off
and bit one of them on the back.
So this is-- it was
an ongoing case.
Once the case broke, it reached
the "Akron Beacon Journal."
It ran all across the country
and all these major news media
outlets and became
a global phenomenon.
>>NOORY: Jeez.
Do we know if the
kid who was bitten
got infected or
anything like that?
>>BREEDLOVE: He claims
to have a scar still
on his back from the incident.
>>NOORY: I would
like to see that.
>>BREEDLOVE: So would
I. He was actually
at one of our
screenings of the film,
and he got out before
I could ask him.
But I'm hoping maybe
in the next year
I can run into him again
and try to get a look at it.
>>NOORY: Would you have
been suspicious had he not
shown it to you?
>>BREEDLOVE: You know what?
I'm not going to blame anyone
for not taking their shirt off.
Or like--
>>NOORY: If I had been bitten
by a Bigfoot, I would show you.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
That's kind of the
way I feel about it.
They also called
the police on that.
There's police reports connected
with this case as well,
which is unusual for a
lot of Bigfoot cases.
You can't find this kind
of official documentation.
But with this case,
there's a ton of it.
And then it was also
being documented
by all the local papers.
>>NOORY: Are you're still
getting Minerva Bigfoot
sightings?
>>BREEDLOVE: Oh yeah.
Yeah.
I'd say once or twice a
month I'll get someone.
But we get-- beyond
modern sightings,
we get people contacting us who
did see something back in '78
or yeah.
And there were--
>>NOORY: Then it it might
not be the same creature.
It may have been an offspring.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
And well, that's what's unique
about the Minerva case too,
is that there were
these sightings
of two other creatures
accompanying it
who are said to be smaller.
>>NOORY: Like babies?
>>BREEDLOVE: Possibly babies.
What's unusual
about this case is
that the Caytons claim that
these creatures that they're
seeing are cat-like.
Feline.
>>NOORY: Huh.
With tails?
>>BREEDLOVE: With tails.
>>NOORY: But standing upright.
>>BREEDLOVE: Mountain lion,
black mountain lioness,
panther, cougar.
>>NOORY: Standing upright.
>>BREEDLOVE: No.
On all fours.
Quadrupeds.
But beyond that, there
were other witnesses
we talked to who did claim
to see the creature with two
smaller ones.
Two juveniles.
So the theory runs--
obviously, everyone
wants to concoct their
own theory on this--
but my theory is that
possibly these were juveniles.
Maybe they move on all fours.
Maybe they move hunched forward.
>>NOORY: Until they stand up.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
Something like that.
Whatever it was, it's
a really unusual case.
Because I've never-- I'm not
acquainted with other Bigfoot
sighting cases where you've
got a Bigfoot accompanied
by two other creatures,
especially cats.
>>NOORY: Would you
like to see it?
>>BREEDLOVE: Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: Would it scare you?
>>BREEDLOVE: It
would terrify me.
>>NOORY: Would you run?
>>BREEDLOVE: I'd-- yeah.
Yeah.
Amongst other--
screaming, running.
>>NOORY: Maybe see it in the
car, with the engine running.
Right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
Yeah.
Dart across the road
or something like that.
>>NOORY: You did a documentary
on the Whitehall monster
as well, right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
"Beast of Whitehall."
>>NOORY: Let's take a look at
the beast of Whitehall, New
York.
>>I still dream about this
incident once in a while.
But back then, I relived that
thing day in and day out, night
after night.
I would have relive that.
And you know, one of
the craziest things,
right to this day, right to
this moment, this second,
is what the hell
was I looking at.
>>It was the talk of the town.
It was the talk of the region.
It was a big deal when
the '76 case happened.
But we weren't really so
used to hearing reports
about Big Foot in own backyards,
here in New York state.
>>This is when he
detected movement
along the telephone pole.
As it passed in
front of the pole,
he says it began running towards
Paddock's green pickup truck.
He said, I couldn't speak at
first, but finally blurted out,
Marty, get the hell out of here.
That's when Paddock spun out,
leaving 57 feet of rubber
as he fishtailed down the road.
>>NOORY: Seth, tell us more
about the "Beast of Whitehall."
>>BREEDLOVE: "Beast
of Whitehall"
is a film about this very famous
Bigfoot case that happened back
in 1976, the Whitehall
Creature Case,
as it was referred
to in the paper.
The first article that ran about
it referred to it as a beast,
and that came from the
kids' accounts, the three
boys that were in this truck.
>>NOORY: A great
headline, right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
There were a lot of
great headlines connected
with this story, which
you would appreciate.
But there are so
many fascinating ones
because there was also this
UFO flap that was taking
place synonymous with this.
So there were these two crazy
things occurring simultaneously
in Whitehall.
But basically, the film
documents the 1976 Abair
incident, which was these
three-- well, actually,
two boys were driving down
this isolated dirt road,
late at night.
And they had this sighting of
an upright-walking, hair-covered
classic Bigfoot, crossed
the road in front of them.
They turned around.
They go into town.
They get a third boy.
They come back out,
and all three of them
have a sighting of
this creature again.
So at this point, they turn
around to go back to town
and get one of the kids
father, who was also
the police chief at the time.
They tell him about the case.
And--
>>NOORY: Does he believe it?
>>BREEDLOVE:
Automatically, he does.
Because he also brings
seven other members of law
enforcement out to the site.
>>NOORY: He believed it.
He believed it.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
So 11 people are
out at the sighting
when this happens, and
they all see the creature.
So 11 people, eight of which
are members of law enforcement,
proceed to see this
upright-walking, hair-covered
monster.
The most common occurrence,
the thing that people always
talk about, are the glowing
red eyes, especially
in this Abair case.
Everyone talks about it.
>>NOORY: Yeah, that's different.
We don't hear a lot about
glowing red eyes on a Bigfoot.
>>BREEDLOVE: And just kind
of drawing off of that,
there's a long history of
glowing-red-eyed creatures
in Whitehall, New York.
There was a sighting
a year prior--
>>NOORY: Panthers.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
A year prior, there was
a sighting by a golf club
owner about a mile
from Abair Road.
They claimed to see it.
We've got that
documented in the film.
And then there's actually
Native American legends
that also talk about it.
So.
>>NOORY: Seth, what do you
think of the witnesses,
and their ability to
describe what they've seen,
and their authenticity?
>>BREEDLOVE: With
the Whitehall case,
there's eight members
of law enforcement.
Now, a lot of those law
enforcement officials
didn't officially come forward
and talk about their case.
Because this was, again,
like with Minerva,
there was a lot of ridicule.
>>NOORY: Did you have to
pull this out of them?
>>BREEDLOVE: With our main
witness, Brian Gosselin,
we did.
And that's for a few
different reasons,
not just because he doesn't
want the ridicule factor.
Brian's been telling this
story since it happened.
But the problem is,
with Brian, that there's
been a long history
of taking his story
and changing it, or changing
the entire Abair incident.
So what we set out to
do was to actually tell
that story, the Abair
incident, start to finish,
the way it actually happened.
And so we were able to do that,
which I'm really proud of.
But as far as his ability to
tell his story well and all
that, I loved it.
I thought it was one
of the best witness
encounters I've ever heard.
It actually gave me goosebumps
while he was telling it.
And we were out in the middle
of the field where it happened.
So that--
>>NOORY: You could feel it.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
You could.
And he started-- he
actually teared up
towards the end
of his interview.
>>NOORY: Why?
Emotional?
>>BREEDLOVE: It's a
really emotional account.
We tried to capture
that with the film,
the emotion of the story.
Because again,
like with Minerva,
there's a family at
the center of this.
And it's the Gosselin family.
It was Brian, his brother,
Paul, who was one of the boys,
and then their father,
who was the police chief.
And they all three had
their own sightings,
and it all impacted their
lives in a major way.
So we tried to
capture that in music
that Brandon Dalo composes
for the films, and all that.
Because the psychological
and the emotional impact
that these stories
have on those people
is just as important to me as
the monster at the heart of it.
>>NOORY: And when you
see that, you really
believe this person's
telling the truth.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right, right.
But yeah.
As far as their
ability to properly
give their story and their
observational skills tops.
And we had audiotaped interviews
with those original witnesses,
the three boys.
Who one of the boys
has passed away.
Paul passed away.
And then the other two
boys don't want anything
to do with the story anymore.
But we have audio
taped interviews
that Bill Brann actually took
prior-- or following the day
after that incident.
So we have, from 1976, their
accounts of what happened.
>>NOORY: Does this
echo Minerva at all?
>>BREEDLOVE: Yes.
Yeah, definitely.
The way it echoes it
though is, like I said,
it's the familial
aspect that draws me in.
But I think the way the
town responded, especially,
and the way the town has
been impacted by the story.
>>NOORY: It's got to be huge.
>>BREEDLOVE: In a
major way, yeah.
There's people
like-- in our movie,
we have Paul Bartholomew,
who's a local.
And he grew up
aware of that story.
And because of that
story being so popular
in the local folklore,
I think that inspired
him to become this author and
researcher that he is today.
It inspired a lot
of people that are
in big footing who might
not even live in that area
to get into the subject.
>>NOORY: So you've
also investigated
the creature of Boggy Creek.
Let's take a look.
>>I want you to go back
down there and tell
your mama there ain't a thing
in the world to be afraid of.
I'll come down there tomorrow.
Something came through
here last night
and killed my two prize shoals.
Found one of them
lying right here.
Deep gashes.
Cut through and
tongues hanging out.
Looked like something
strangled them.
I keep them down-- over down
here by the creek in this pen.
>>This is Fouke, Arkansas.
I grew up here.
The population was about
350 when I was born.
[WOMAN SCREAMING]
[CREATURE ROARING]
>>NOORY: All right.
Tell me something
about this thing.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
This is the dream small
town monsters project.
If when we got into
all of this, the dream
was to someday do the granddaddy
of all small town monsters.
>>NOORY: There was a real
movie done about this.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right. "The
Legend of Boggy Creek"
came out in 1972 and
documented these sightings that
were happening in and around
the town of Fouke, Arkansas.
Now the sightings in the
movie go back to the '50s.
But there was a
history of sightings
in and around Arkansas that
go back through the 1800s,
with wild man sightings, and
the Watchdog Mountain Range,
and obviously, there's
sightings from all over.
One of the things that always
draws me to these stories
is the newspaper
historical accounts.
So I did my own
research into these.
>>NOORY: Those are the best.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
I did my own research and
was able to uncover stories
from the late 1800s.
A lot of stories
So we wanted to examine not
just that Legend of Boggy Creek
story, which so many people are
familiar with because of that
movie, but also
what's going on today.
Are there sightings
that happened
after the movie came out?
And then obviously,
how we handle things.
How did this impact Fouke?
And how did it impact
Arkansas in general?
And was it a positive
impact or a negative one?
Was the creature seen again?
Was there evidence found for it?
That kind of thing.
So we've just started
pre-production on this.
We actually start filming
the movie in about a month.
So we're gearing up for that.
>>NOORY: That's exciting.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
It's our biggest project.
We've never done
anything like this.
We had to run a Kickstarter
campaign to actually fund
the production of--
>>NOORY: How much did
you have to raise?
>>BREEDLOVE: We set the goal at
$9,000, and we raised $17,000.
So we did great on that.
>>NOORY: Well, good.
So you got what
you need to do it.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
>>NOORY: That's a pretty
good budget documentary.
>>BREEDLOVE: For
what we're doing
it's definitely the highest
we've had to work with.
So we wanted the best quality
we could possibly get.
Now, obviously, the dream
is to go down to Fouke
and have a run-in with
Fouke monster ourselves,
so we could put
that in the movie.
>>NOORY: What does
that region look like?
The Boggy Creek region?
>>BREEDLOVE: It's
not what I expected.
When I got out to
Arkansas, in your mind,
you're thinking of Boggy Creek.
You're thinking of the
opening with the swamp,
and there's this swamp--
>>NOORY: Seaweed everywhere
and all that stuff.
>>BREEDLOVE: Exactly.
And what I found is that it
actually looked really similar
to Ohio, to Minerva,
or to Whitehall,
which also bears similarities
to the section of Ohio.
It's flat.
There's a lot of flat pasture
land, dense woods, obviously.
But then you've
got this tiny town
tucked in the middle of it.
To really hit that
swampy area-- we
had to drive about 20
minutes outside of town just
to hit that really swampy area.
But that creek, the Boggy
Creek, that obviously
lends its namesake to the whole
thing, that actually just runs
right outside of town.
It's this tiny little run off.
I mean, we drove past
the creek eight times,
because I didn't realize
that was the creek.
It just doesn't-- I
guess the-- in your head,
you're picturing this
epic, massive waterway,
because you're thinking of
the monster and all that.
So it just-- I
guess, in my head,
it wasn't quite what it ended
up being like in reality.
>>NOORY: There are a
lot of internet hoaxes
and YouTube videos of
these kinds of creatures.
I want to take a
quick look at that.
>>Watch.
Up here in the top
right hand corner
is where the creature is.
I'm going to turn
this up a little bit.
Sorry if it's loud.
You can hear that it's
breaking through branches.
Now, the interesting part
for me is right there.
You can see a little gap.
It walks right through that gap.
All right.
So look how massive
that thing walks.
It walks with great
ease, it looks like.
And then you just
see the face poke out
from some bushes right there.
>>NOORY: I really
couldn't see a creature.
>>BREEDLOVE: No.
I didn't either. [LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: It sounded dramatic.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
I think a lot of the internet
stuff, especially on YouTube,
is built around ad revenue.
I'm going to make
some enemies for that.
>>NOORY: The more hits you
get, the more you make.
Right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
And if you stick--
and I know this
from putting our
trailers online.
If you put the name Bigfoot
in there or Bigfoot sighting--
>>NOORY: You're going
to get some hits.
>>BREEDLOVE: --in the
headline, you get more hits.
So I think a lot of it is
built around trying to gain
monetarily from whatever.
I think there are legitimate
videos that have been taken.
I'm a big fan of the
Patterson-Gimlin video.
I like the Freeman footage.
There's video from Oklahoma
that I find fascinating.
But as far as the people
that are constantly
updating with their
own Bigfoot footage,
I find a lot of that
really questionable.
>>NOORY: Seth, it
seems like most
of the discussions
about these creatures,
whether it's Whitehall
or Minerva or Boggy Creek
or god knows where,
we're talking
about a similar
creature, aren't we?
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
It always seems to be that
upright-walking, neighborhood
of six to nine feet,
6 to 10 feet tall.
Massive shoulder
width, huge creature.
The eyes, you do hear these
reports of glowing eyes,
which I've always found
to be really such--
>>NOORY: That's intriguing.
>>BREEDLOVE: It is.
It's one of the most fascinating
and hard to peg elements
of the Bigfoot phenomenon.
Because if you're thinking, OK.
It's just an upright walking
ape, undiscovered ape,
where do glowing eyes
fit into all of that?
>>NOORY: Where do
they fit into that?
Indeed.
I want to go through some
internet questions for you,
Seth.
We've got Gary from Louisiana.
He says, what do you
think has changed
the most since you first
got into the Bigfoot
investigations?
>>BREEDLOVE: Wow.
You know what?
I think when I first got into
looking into Bigfoot, the thing
that I noticed that changed
the most was the community that
has kind of built
up around Bigfoot.
I think there's-- we went from
a-- there's always been a lot
of conflict.
But it seems like the
conflict is ramped up
in the community itself lately.
Everyone is defending their
own viewpoint on it vehemently.
And I think, for me, I
mean, I know that's probably
not the most romantic answer.
But that's the biggest change.
As far as the Bigfoot sightings,
they've stayed the same.
People are still seeing
something tall, huge, upright,
walking around in
the woods that seems
to be an unidentified animal.
>>NOORY: The Minerva one seems
to be more violent than some
of the other cases I've heard.
Because you normally
don't hear about dead deer
in a tree or a dog ripped
up or anything like that.
>>BREEDLOVE: Well, it's
odd too, because the Cayton
family in Minerva, they call
that creature their pet now.
>>NOORY: Their pet?
>>BREEDLOVE: They love it.
The movie ends in Minerva's--
>>NOORY: Does he have a name?
>>BREEDLOVE: No.
No.
They haven't-- I
think just Mini.
No.
I just gave it that.
But I don't think
that-- they did not
feel that this was a
threatening animal.
Now, with the Whitehall
case, that creature
was screaming at people,
and they actually
felt threatened by it.
But the Boggy creature is also
supposed to be pretty violent.
I mean, it ripped-- there's
a story where it supposedly
jumped into the
back of a trailer.
These guys were hauling a couple
motorcycles down the road,
and it supposedly jumped into
the back of their trailer,
ripped up their
motorcycles, and took off.
>>NOORY: Not on the motorcycle.
>>BREEDLOVE: On a motorcycle,
driving down the-- [LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: That
would be something.
>>BREEDLOVE: That would
really add a lot to the movie.
>>NOORY: It would.
And off it goes.
Cliff from Rochester, New York.
He wants you to explain
Minerva Monster Day.
>>BREEDLOVE: Minerva Monster
Day was this fantastic event
that built up because
of the amount of press
that Minerva Monster
managed to gain in Ohio.
People were really
fascinated by the story,
and they wanted to
learn about the case.
So what we did was we actually
ran a festival out in Minerva,
where people can come out
and see "Minerva Monster."
That was what we did last year.
This year, September
23rd and 24th,
we're hosting
Minerva Monster Days.
So it's actually
Friday and Saturday.
And we're going to run
an all-ages film festival
on Friday night, so kids can
make their own monster movies
and--
>>NOORY: The attendance
is normally pretty good?
>>BREEDLOVE: It's fantastic.
Last year, we had
about 1,200 people.
We packed up every showing
of four showings of the movie
at the Roxy Theater.
So we're going to do
it again this year,
and I think it's going to be
much bigger, because we're
actually having some
other filmmakers come out
and bring their movies.
So we've got a Loch Ness
Monster short film coming.
We've got a documentary
about Bigfoot, people that
have seen Bigfoot, witnesses.
And then we've got "Beast
of Whitehall" and "Minerva
Monster," and we're hoping
to get a speaker, actually,
in to speak about the film.
So if everything
goes well there,
we're looking toward a
certain really cool guest.
>>NOORY: That will be good.
What's your mission here?
What do you want to
accomplish with all these?
>>BREEDLOVE: Document history.
I grew up in a family that
owned a historical bookstore,
and I grew up around history.
I listened to guys
speak about history
almost every
weekend of my youth.
It bored me to tears,
but now that I'm older,
I understand the importance
of preserving history.
And to a lot of people,
this subject seems silly.
Bigfoot seems silly.
But regardless of your belief,
your own personal belief
in the existence of
Bigfoot, these stories
happened to the people
that are telling them.
And when those people
pass, those stories
might pass with them.
And for us to be able to
document things visually with--
>>NOORY: With great witnesses
too, before they die.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
And we-- building
off of that, we
lost Paul Gosselin, one of the
boys that was in the truck.
The day we decided to make
"Whitehall," he passed away.
So--
>>NOORY: So you never
got him on film.
>>BREEDLOVE: We never
We have the audio tape with
him, which is fantastic.
>>NOORY: Well, that
would live forever.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
And so for us, it's always been
about preservation of history
and to let the witnesses
tell their story.
A lot of the entertainment
you see on television
is over dramatic.
It's over dramatized.
It's--
>>NOORY: They have to
do something like that.
Right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
Supposedly.
>>NOORY: But 9 out
of 10 times, nothing
happens when they
go on these things.
>>BREEDLOVE: Exactly.
But in my opinion,
those original stories
are just as creepy,
just as scary
as someone running
through the woods,
having someone else
throw rocks at them
or whatever is going on.
>>NOORY: Nothing
like the real deal.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
So when you hear Brian Gosselin
standing in that location,
telling his story, I think
that there's an element of fear
that is added just from that.
So that's our mission is
to tell it straightforward
and let the witnesses
tell their story.
>>NOORY: There is some
audio of an individual who's
flying a Cessna plane,
and he's reporting in
that there's an object
coming at him, a huge object,
and then he's gone.
You hear nothing.
He's gone.
And he's never found again.
What was it?
What did he see?
But those kinds of eyewitness
testimonies are amazing.
You can't beat it.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
Yeah, I've always been
sold on the witnesses being
the real draw of this subject.
I'm just as fascinated by the
witnesses as I am the monster.
I always say that.
And at the heart of our
films are the people.
I don't-- with just
stories about Bigfoot,
that's just someone
recounting a story.
When you have the actual
person that lived it tell--
>>NOORY: Saw it.
Witnessed this.
Felt it.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
And that adds just such an
element to these that I think
is missing from a lot of
Bigfoot entertainment.
>>NOORY: Would you like to
give them all polygraph tests?
>>BREEDLOVE: No. [LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: Just to know.
>>BREEDLOVE: No.
I mean, because
in a lot of cases,
I don't even know that
you can trust a polygraph
to begin with.
But I just feel like in
a lot of these cases,
it's almost disingenuous
if I were to do that.
I do believe Howie
Cayton's story.
And I believe I'm pretty
good at reading people.
And with Howie Cayton,
I know something
happened to that family.
>>NOORY: Mm-hm.
Something happened.
>>BREEDLOVE: It was documented.
It was the police chief
down in Minerva at the time.
He said he witnessed
something as well.
He smelled something very
unusual around their house.
The family was full of fear.
So something happened
to that family.
Sticking him in front of
a polygraph, I don't know.
I don't know how
I feel about it.
>>NOORY: Well, it
shakes their foundation,
to be sure, when they
see something like this
and they can't explain it.
>>BREEDLOVE: Mm-hm.
It changes their lives.
>>NOORY: It does.
They're never the same.
I wouldn't be.
Sarah from Baltimore,
Maryland, simply
wants to know if you
know of any native legend
stories about Bigfoot.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
When I first got into this,
I did a lot of research
into that element,
because I'm really
fascinated by native legends
and historical accounts.
>>NOORY: And they're
always there.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
And I don't know if you're
familiar with Kathy Strain,
but she wrote a book
called "Giants, Cannibals,
and Monsters," and I draw a lot
from that book and her research
too.
But as far as the historical
or the native accounts,
one of the fascinating--
I briefly touched on it.
But there were these
Native American legends
around the Adirondacks
of creatures
whose eyes glowed like coal.
And given the red eyes of
the creature that everyone
witnessed at
Whitehall that night,
you wonder if there
isn't something to that.
I find that little bit of
evidence more compelling
than 1,000 foot print casts.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
And finally, Jim
from Topeka, Kansas,
says I loved the
"Beast of Whitehall,"
and I'd like to
know if there were
any stories that made
it on the editing floor
that we didn't see.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
There-- thanks, Jim.
He must have been a
Kickstarter supporter.
Because Kickstarter--
>>NOORY: He might have been.
Might have been.
>>BREEDLOVE:
Kickstarter supporters
were able to actually see the
movie ahead of the release
date on April 1st.
But there were quite a few
stories that were dropped.
There was one story that's
briefly touched on in the film
that I absolutely love.
The Frank McFerrin shooting.
Frank McFerrin actually lived
on a road that ran perpendicular
to Abair Road, where those
initial sightings happened.
And he claimed to have fired
shots at this creature--
>>NOORY: God, that's not smart.
>>BREEDLOVE: --in the
same week that the Abair
incident happened.
The Abair incident,
which is the tag line
of "Beast of Whitehall,"
the Abair incident
is referring not just to that
initial night, but everything
that happened following it.
There was about a week
of extreme activity
over in Whitehall
and Abair Road.
>>NOORY: I had a call once on
one of our open line shows,
Seth.
And the guy called and says,
George, me and my buddies,
we're going out, and we're
going to shoot a Bigfoot.
And I kept trying to
tell him, don't go out
there to shoot a Bigfoot.
I can understand if
something's attacking you,
and you have to defend yourself.
But just don't blatantly go
out there to shoot a Bigfoot.
And so I tried to
talk him out of it.
I don't know if I did or not.
He obviously didn't
shoot a Bigfoot.
But people are geared to doing
that, which also tells me there
aren't a lot of people running
around in a Bigfoot costume.
There was one guy who got hit
by a car in a Bigfoot outfit.
That's got to be one of
the dumbest things to do.
Right?
With people with that
mentality to shoot.
>>BREEDLOVE: Exactly.
And we-- actually,
that is something
that runs across all
three of our films.
The posses of people that end
up going out looking for Bigfoot
around the properties of the
people who claim to see him.
And that was a
case with Minerva.
We found hundreds,
literally hundreds
of hunters started showing
up on the Cayton's property
with beer and shotguns,
walking up into the woods.
>>NOORY: Like a party.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
And they had kids.
So there's children
around the Cayton's house,
and you've got hunters
up behind their house,
drunk hunters firing shotguns
around their property.
So I agree with you.
It seems to be a common
occurrence that people run out
with guns the second these
sightings start happening.
>>NOORY: What do you think of
fraudsters and hoaxsters who
will get a Bigfoot costume
and stuff it with deer guts
and things like that?
To me, that diminishes and
kills and severely hurts
real investigations.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah, absolutely.
I totally agree.
And it also makes
us all look foolish.
Anyone that's involved
in this subject,
the subject of Bigfoot, it makes
the rest of us look foolish.
Because that's what people
start connecting with Bigfoot.
Now they see the body in
the freezer, which everyone
remembers as that famous hoax.
There's-- it damages the
credibility of anyone,
in my opinion, that is looking
into the possibility that these
things might actually exist.
>>NOORY: I've
tossed a few people
off the show who have, I think,
been questionable and tried
to make money on events
dealing with Bigfoot.
And they've never been
back on the air since.
>>BREEDLOVE: That's
probably a good thing.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
We don't have them.
So as the research
continues, are we
going to get the
answers to this?
Are we really going to get a
definitive creature, hopefully
captured, as opposed to killed,
where science can look at it
and go, oh my god.
Look at this.
This probably is the missing
link between ape and man.
Are we ever going to get that?
>>BREEDLOVE: It's hard to say.
Great men have died looking into
this without the answers ever
coming to them.
Grover Krantz passed away,
and he was, obviously,
heavily involved in this.
He spent his life in
search of this creature.
Rene Dahinden, these guys that
looked into the Bigfoot subject
their whole lives.
And you've got to
wonder, if these guys
were out as much as they
were looking for Bigfoot
and never found it, even with
the technological advances
we're having with cell phone
cameras and all of this stuff,
do we stand any hope of
seeing that in our lifetime?
I'm not sure.
And the question I always come
back with is do you want it.
Do you want the
answer to the mystery?
And a lot of people
that are into Bigfoot,
they don't want it.
>>NOORY: It's like
Nessie in Scotland.
>>BREEDLOVE: It's just fun.
>>NOORY: They don't want Nessie
captured because they don't
want to make sure-- they
don't want to see a large eel,
for example.
I want to romanticize
about Nessie.
I want to think it's a
plesiosaur from the dinosaur
era.
That's what I want, with its
little flippers and everything
else, and its long neck.
I don't want somebody to
find it and say it's a fish,
or it's that.
I don't want that answer.
>>BREEDLOVE: I'm
right in between.
I like the subject.
I love the subject.
And I'm in love with
the mystery of it too.
But eventually,
I want an answer.
>>NOORY: Well, you need one.
You expect one.
So let's look at a clip.
And you tell me if you
think it's real or not.
Here we go.
Clearly you could see
something in the foreground.
Right?
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
Something.
I can't tell.
That's the frustrating
thing about these videos,
always, to me, is
they're so vague.
And I understand.
When you're out in
nature, if you actually
are seeing something
you can't explain,
you're probably going
to be shaking a little.
>>NOORY: See, that's where
you've got to put the camera
guy on a lie detector test.
Did he set that up?
Is that his buddy in a costume?
Or is that a real creature
he stumbled across?
>>BREEDLOVE: Are we ever
going to reach the level
of the Patterson-Gimlin film?
I think that's
the real question.
Are we ever going
to get something--
>>NOORY: And some people
still question that, Seth.
>>BREEDLOVE: Right.
As for something like
that, it's so vague,
I have no way of telling.
You watch the
Patterson-Gimlin film,
it comes down to a question
of well, was it a suit,
or was it a real creature.
It's not even an
argument of was there
anything in the picture or not.
>>NOORY: What does
your heart tell you
about what we might
be looking at?
>>BREEDLOVE: What
does my heart tell me?
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
With all these stories.
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
If it's a real creature,
if it's out there,
I believe the evidence points
to an undiscovered ape.
And I go back to the
historical sightings
going back into the 1800s.
There were ape reports in Ohio.
>>NOORY: Which is a little more
evolved than a standard ape.
>>BREEDLOVE: Sure.
Yeah.
Upright-walking,
hair-covered ape.
That's what I believe
the evidence points to.
I'm not married to one
obvious theory on it.
But that seems to be,
from what I've read
and from the research I've
done, it looks like it's an ape.
>>NOORY: Seems to have
some intelligence though.
>>BREEDLOVE: A lot
of intelligence.
Yeah.
And again, there's a lot at play
here beyond just these stories
that we've talked about today.
There are so many
weird incidents
involved with this subject.
You always have to wonder, am I
just being hoaxed by everyone?
What if-- the longer
you're into it,
the more questions
you have, I'm finding.
>>NOORY: If people want
information on you,
Seth, where do they go?
>>BREEDLOVE:
Smalltownmonsters.com
is where I point everyone to.
>>NOORY: Smalltownmonsters.com
>>BREEDLOVE: Yeah.
Or our Facebook page,
Small Town Monsters.
>>NOORY: It's exciting.
Keep up the good work, though.
It's intriguing, and
somebody's got to do it.
>>BREEDLOVE: Thank you.
>>NOORY: Creatures, monsters.
I don't know if I'll ever
get the answer to them.
But it's good to know
that we've got people
like Seth Breedlove who
are out there to try
to find out if they're real.
I'm George Noory,
and thanks again
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]